Appeal No. 167 of 1955.
section N. Kherdekar, N. K. Kherdekar and A. G. Ratna.
N. C. Chatterjee, section A. Sohni and Ganpat Rai, for respondent No. 1. 1960.
In pursuance of this agreement the vendors applied to the Deputy Commissioner, Akola, on August 12, 1943, for diver sion under section 58 of the Code and sanction was accorded on January 22, 1944, subject to payment of premium of Rs. 9,222 and other conditions.
It was also alleged that the price was not fixed in good faith.
Both the trial court and the District Judge held that respondent Sridhar was entitled to preempt and determined the fair consideration to be Rs. 3,306.
No doubt there the learned Chief Justice in the majority judgment did say that to import into the Mohammedan Law of pre emption the definition of the word " sale " with restrictions contained in section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act would materially alter Mohammedan Law of preemption and afford fraudulent persons to avoid the law of pre emption; with this view Bannerji, J., did Dot agree.
It is neither illegal nor fraudulent for parties to a transfer to avoid and defeat a claim for pre emption by all legitimate means.
It was then submitted that the sale deed had as a matter of fact, been executed on February 1, 1944; but respondent Sridhar brought the suit not on the cause of action arising on the sale dated February 1, 1944, but on the transaction of April 10, 1943, coupled with that of April 24, 1943, which being mere contracts of sale created no interest in the vendee and there was no right of pre emption in respondent No. I which could be enforced under the Code.
In the Berar Settlement Rules and Berar Sub tenancy Rules of 1866 the right of pre emption attached to relinquishment of shares in the case of ryots of joint holdings and applied to co sharers and this is different from the rule of Mohammedan law.
Under section 174 pre emptive rights arise in respect of transfers of unalienated land held for agricultural purposes and before an occupant could transfer the whole or any portion of his interest he had to give notice of his intention to all other occupants.
It was held by the Privy Council in Immudipattam Thirugnana section O. Kondema Naik vs Peria Dorasami (3) which was a case of a zamindari estate that it could not be transferred except by a registered instrument.
But it was argued for the respondents that the Privy Council had not only approved the observation of Sir John Edge, C. J., in Begum vs Mohammad Yakub(1) but has also approved the view of the Calcutta High Court in Jadu Lal Sahu vs Janki Koer (2).
In our opinion the judgment of the High Court was erroneous and we would therefore allow this appeal, set aside the judgment and decree of the High Court and dismiss the suit with costs throughout.
